page_content:
SurgVeo, a benchmark for video generation in surgery, and the Surgical Plausibility Pyramid reveal a gap between visual plausibility and causal understanding in surgical AI models.
Foundation models in video generation are demonstrating remarkable capabilities as potential world models for simulating the physical world. However, their application in high-stakes domains like surgery, which demand deep, specialized causal knowledge rather than general physical rules, remains a critical unexplored gap. To systematically address this challenge, we present SurgVeo, the first expert-curated benchmark for video generation model evaluation in surgery, and the Surgical Plausibility Pyramid (SPP), a novel, four-tiered framework tailored to assess model outputs from basic appearance to complex surgical strategy. On the basis of the SurgVeo benchmark, we task the advanced Veo-3 model with a zero-shot prediction task on surgical clips from laparoscopic and neurosurgical procedures. A panel of four board-certified surgeons evaluates the generated videos according to the SPP. Our results reveal a distinct "plausibility gap": while Veo-3 achieves exceptional Visual Perceptual Plausibility, it fails critically at higher levels of the SPP, including Instrument Operation Plausibility, Environment Feedback Plausibility, and Surgical Intent Plausibility. This work provides the first quantitative evidence of the chasm between visually convincing mimicry and causal understanding in surgical AI. Our findings from SurgVeo and the SPP establish a crucial foundation and roadmap for developing future models capable of navigating the complexities of specialized, real-world healthcare domains.

MetaData:
{
    "papername": "How Far Are Surgeons from Surgical World Models? A Pilot Study on Zero-shot Surgical Video Generation with Expert Assessment",
    "github_url": "",
    "huggingface_url": "https://huggingface.co/papers/2511.01775",
    "upvote": 6,
    "tag1": "plausibility",
    "tag2": "surgical",
    "tag3": "surgveo"
}